
# Setting Up Load Balancing by Using NGINX

This chapter describes how to configure NGINX as a load balancer and includes installation instructions and configuration directives. For an overview of NGINX, see About NGINX.

---

## Installing NGINX

Before you can use NGINX for load balancing, you must first install the software and configure the environment.

1. **Install the nginx package** on each server:

   ```bash
   sudo dnf install nginx
   ```

   Depending on the intended configuration, you might need to install more modules. The `nginx-all-modules` metapackage installs all of the packages. To display the complete listing of the available modules in the package manager, use the following command:

   ```bash
   sudo dnf search nginx-mod\*
   ```

   > **Note:** If you intend to do TCP/UDP load balancing, you must install the `nginx-mod-stream` module package.

2. **Enable access** to the services or ports that you want NGINX to handle.

   For example, you would accept incoming TCP requests on port 80 as follows:

   ```bash
   sudo firewall-cmd --zone=zone --add-port=80/tcp
   sudo firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=zone --add-port=80/tcp
   ```

3. **If SELinux is set to enforcing mode** on the system, add a rule to allow NGINX to relay HTTP traffic to any configured backend servers:

   ```bash
   sudo setsebool httpd_can_network_relay on
   ```

4. **Enable and start the nginx service** on the server:

   ```bash
   sudo systemctl enable --now nginx
   ```

   If you change the NGINX configuration, reload the nginx service:

   ```bash
   sudo systemctl reload nginx
   ```

---

## NGINX Configuration Directives

NGINX configuration can be spread across several files to specify different configuration directives and set the values for configuration variables. Configuration is stored in `/etc/nginx`. The base configuration is stored in `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf`, while site-specific configuration tends to be created within distinct files in `/etc/nginx/conf.d/`. By convention, site configurations tend to use the full domain name for the file name and would have a `.conf` suffix.

In these examples, a configuration has the following general format:

```nginx
http {
  server {
    listen 80;
    listen [::]:80;
    server_name example.com www.example.com;

    location / {
      root /usr/share/nginx/html/example.com;
      index index.html;
    }
  }
}
```

The previous example shows an HTTP server configuration for a web server that serves content from the web root directory at `/usr/share/nginx/html/example.com`.

### Useful Configuration Directives for Load Balancing

#### `http`, `https`, `stream`

Defines the protocol for which the settings apply. Use `https` for TLS connections to the load balancer and `stream` for generic TCP/UDP traffic.

#### `server`

Defines how to handle incoming traffic from the specified ports for the chosen protocol.

To configure at least one listening port for IPv4, use the `listen` keyword:

```nginx
listen 80;
```

To listen on IPv6 interfaces, prepend the `[::]:` directive to the port number, for example:

```nginx
listen [::]:80
```

> **Note:** The `listen` lines can be duplicated to specify more than one port for a `server` block.

Use the `server_name` keyword to define the hostname or domain name that the server responds to. If you don't specify this value, the configuration applies to any incoming connection. However, you might need to comment out the default server configuration within `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` to avoid conflicting configuration definitions.

#### `location`

The `location` directive defines path mappings and behavior, depending on incoming requests on the server. At minimum, you must have a value for the web root that's indicated with the value `/`. The behavior is defined by setting values within a `location` block.

For example, to configure a simple web server that serves content from a directory on the server, use the `root` keyword and specify the content's directory location.

The `proxy_pass` directive can be used to implement a reverse proxy service. Traffic is proxied onto the specified server or group of servers, as defined in an `upstream` directive.

For example, you would proxy inbound HTTP traffic to a website that's hosted on `websrv1.example.com` on port 9090 as follows:

```nginx
server {
  location / {
    proxy_pass http://websrv1.example.com:9090;
  }
}
```

You can also specify a server group by referencing its defined upstream name.

#### `upstream`

An `upstream` directive is used to define a group of one or more servers where the content is stored and which can be used by the `proxy_pass` directive. For example, you can create an upstream group of servers called `backend` as follows:

```nginx
upstream backend {
  server server1.example.com;
  server server2.example.com;
  server server3.example.com;
}
```

To use this group, the `proxy_pass` directive is specified:

```nginx
proxy_pass http://backend;
```

The `upstream` directive is the key configuration component that's used to control load-balancing methods and algorithms. For more information, see [http://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html](http://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html).

---

## Configuring Round Robin Load Balancing by Using NGINX

The default load balancing method that's used by NGINX is the **round-robin** method. This method proxies traffic sequentially to each server in a defined group.

Create a configuration file for the load balancer at `/etc/nginx/conf.d/example.com.conf`, where `example.com` is the name of the external domain where inbound traffic is directed. The file would contain the following content:

```nginx
http {
  upstream backend {
    server server1.example.com;
    server server2.example.com;
    server server3.example.com;
  }

  server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com www.example.com;

    location / {
      proxy_pass http://backend;
    }
  }
}
```

In the `upstream backend` configuration block, list the backend servers within the environment. For example, substitute `server1.example.com` with the fully qualified domain name or the hostname of a web server instance.

Set the `server_name` directive with the domain name or names that you intend to use publicly for the load balanced service. For example, substitute `example.com` and `www.example.com` to match the company domain.

You can optionally append more failover options, such as `max_fails` and `fail_timeout`, to the end of each entry to add resilience in case any of the servers goes offline.

After ensuring that the configuration is valid, enable it by reloading NGINX on the public-facing and backend servers:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

---

## Using Weighted Round Robin Load Balancing With NGINX

When using servers with varying physical locations or differing hardware resources, you can configure NGINX to allocate more of the traffic to servers that provide less latency and can handle more of a load. This method is referred to as the **weighted round-robin** method.

You can configure weighted round-robin by appending a `weight` value to the end of each entry in the server group section of the NGINX site configuration file. Set the weight of the slowest server to `1`, and then set the weight of other servers relative to that setting.

The following example shows how servers can handle multiple times the load of the base server. One server receives twice the amount of traffic, while the other server receives four times the amount:

```nginx
upstream backend {
  server server1.example.com weight=1;
  server server2.example.com weight=2;
  server server3.example.com weight=4;
}
```

Reload NGINX to apply the new configuration:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

---

## Using Least-Connected Load Balancing With NGINX

The **least-connected** load balancing method is used to automatically control the load on application instances, mostly in situations where different inbound requests might take longer to process than other requests.

If you're using the least-connected load balancing method, NGINX always directs new incoming requests to the server with the least number of active requests. This load balancing strategy is intended to ensure that no busy servers are overloaded with new requests, while other servers that can handle the load remain idle.

You can activate the least-connected load balancing method for NGINX by specifying the `least_conn` directive as part of the server group configuration, for example:

```nginx
upstream backend {
  least_conn;
  server server1.example.com;
  server server2.example.com;
  server server3.example.com;
}
```

Reload NGINX to apply the new configuration:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

---

## Adding Session Persistence for NGINX

If you're performing load balancing of a web application, ensure that the same backend server that handled inbound requests continues to do so for the same source. This configuration is important in cases where a website or web service must preserve login sessions between requests, cancel an existing request, or monitor the progress of large backend transactions.

To achieve this behavior, activate the **IP hash** method for NGINX by specifying the `ip_hash` directive as part of the server group configuration, for example:

```nginx
upstream backend {
  ip_hash;
  server server1.example.com;
  server server2.example.com;
  server server3.example.com;
}
```

Reload NGINX to apply the new configuration:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```
 
